.Dd March 29, 2026
.Dt PIQLEY 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm piqley
.Nd plugin-driven photographer workflow engine
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Cm process
.Op Ar workflow-name
.Ar folder-path
.Op Fl -dry-run
.Op Fl -debug
.Op Fl -delete-source-contents
.Op Fl -delete-source-folder
.Op Fl -overwrite-source
.Op Fl -non-interactive
.Nm
.Cm setup
.Nm
.Cm workflow list
.Nm
.Cm workflow edit
.Op Ar workflow-name
.Nm
.Cm workflow create
.Op Ar name
.Nm
.Cm workflow clone
.Ar source destination
.Nm
.Cm workflow delete
.Ar name
.Op Fl -force
.Nm
.Cm workflow open
.Ar name
.Nm
.Cm workflow add-plugin
.Ar workflow plugin stage
.Op Fl -position Ar N
.Nm
.Cm workflow remove-plugin
.Ar workflow plugin stage
.Nm
.Cm workflow config
.Ar workflow plugin
.Op Fl -set Ar key=value
.Op Fl -set-secret Ar KEY=alias
.Nm
.Cm workflow rules
.Op Ar workflow-name
.Ar plugin-id
.Nm
.Cm workflow command
.Op Ar workflow-name
.Ar plugin-id
.Nm
.Cm clear-cache
.Op Fl -plugin Ar name
.Nm
.Cm secret set
.Ar plugin key
.Nm
.Cm secret delete
.Ar plugin key
.Nm
.Cm secret prune
.Nm
.Cm plugin list
.Nm
.Cm plugin setup
.Op Ar plugin-name
.Op Fl -force
.Nm
.Cm plugin init
.Op Ar identifier
.Op Ar display-name
.Op Fl -description Ar text
.Op Fl -no-examples
.Op Fl -non-interactive
.Nm
.Cm plugin create
.Ar target-directory
.Fl -identifier Ar id
.Op Fl -language Ar lang
.Op Fl -name Ar name
.Op Fl -sdk-repo-url Ar url
.Nm
.Cm plugin install
.Ar plugin-file
.Op Fl -force
.Nm
.Cm plugin update
.Ar plugin-file
.Nm
.Cm plugin uninstall
.Ar identifier
.Op Fl -force
.Nm
.Cm uninstall
.Op Fl -force
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a plugin-driven command-line tool for processing and publishing photos
as part of an automated photographer workflow.
.Pp
Given a folder of exported JPEG images,
.Nm
copies them into a temporary working directory and runs them through a
configurable plugin pipeline.
Plugins never have access to the original files and cannot modify or
destroy them.
The temporary directory is automatically cleaned up when processing
finishes.
.Pp
The plugin pipeline is defined in named workflow files stored in
.Pa ~/.config/piqley/workflows/
and consists of named stages that plugins can subscribe to.
Each plugin declares its stages in a
.Pa manifest.json
and may provide executable commands, declarative metadata-matching rules
in per-stage files, or both.
.Pp
Plugins are installed under
.Pa ~/.config/piqley/plugins/ .
Each plugin lives in its own subdirectory (named by its reverse-TLD
identifier) and contains a
.Pa manifest.json
(identity, stages, config schema) and an optional
.Pa config.json
(runtime values).
Plugins must be explicitly listed in a workflow's pipeline to run.
.Pp
Only one instance of
.Nm
may run at a time.
An advisory file lock is used; if another instance is detected, the tool
exits immediately with an error.
.Sh COMMANDS
.Ss process folder-path
Scan
.Ar folder-path
for exported JPEG images and run them through the plugin pipeline.
When multiple workflows exist,
.Ar workflow-name
must be provided before the folder path.
With a single workflow, only the folder path is needed.
.Pp
Available flags:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -dry-run
Preview all actions without uploading or sending anything.
.It Fl -debug
Enable debug output from plugins.
.It Fl -delete-source-contents
Delete the contents of the source folder after a successful run.
The folder itself is preserved but all files and subdirectories inside it
are removed.
Has no effect during a dry run.
.It Fl -delete-source-folder
Delete the source folder and its contents after a successful run.
The entire directory is removed from disk.
Has no effect during a dry run.
.It Fl -overwrite-source
Overwrite source images with processed versions after a successful run.
.It Fl -non-interactive
Skip interactive prompts; drop invalid rules with warnings instead of
asking for confirmation.
.El
.Ss setup
Interactive configuration wizard.
Creates the workflows directory, seeds a default workflow, and installs
bundled plugins from the distribution into the plugins directory.
If plugins are found, prompts for a workflow name and opens the workflow
editor, then runs plugin setup scanners.
.Pp
Run this command before using
.Cm process
for the first time, or to update an existing configuration.
.Ss workflow list
List all workflows by name.
.Ss workflow edit Op workflow-name
Open the workflow list wizard when no name is given, or edit a specific
workflow directly.
The wizard supports creating, deleting, cloning, and editing workflows.
.Ss workflow create Op name
Create a new empty workflow and open it in the editor.
When
.Ar name
is omitted, the command prompts for a name interactively.
.Ss workflow clone source destination
Clone a workflow under a new name.
Errors if
.Ar source
does not exist or
.Ar destination
already exists.
.Ss workflow delete name
Delete a workflow file.
Prompts for confirmation unless
.Fl -force
is passed.
.Ss workflow open name
Open a workflow file in the editor specified by the
.Ev EDITOR
environment variable.
On macOS, falls back to the system
.Xr open 1
command if
.Ev EDITOR
is not set.
.Ss workflow add-plugin workflow plugin stage
Add a plugin to a workflow's pipeline stage.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -position Ar N
Insertion index within the stage's plugin list.
When omitted, the plugin is appended to the end.
.El
.Ss workflow remove-plugin workflow plugin stage
Remove a plugin from a workflow's pipeline stage.
.Ss workflow config workflow plugin
Set per-plugin configuration overrides for a specific workflow.
When called with no options, runs an interactive prompt walking through
each config value and secret alias defined in the plugin's manifest.
.Pp
Available options:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -set Ar key=value
Set a config value override.
May be specified multiple times to set several values at once.
.It Fl -set-secret Ar KEY=alias
Set a secret alias override.
May be specified multiple times.
.El
.Ss workflow rules [workflow-name] plugin-id
Open the interactive rule editor for the specified plugin within a workflow.
If
.Ar workflow-name
is omitted, a list of available workflows is presented for selection.
The editor is a full-screen terminal wizard that guides you through
creating, editing, removing, and reordering declarative metadata rules.
.Pp
The wizard flow:
.Bl -enum -compact
.It
Select a pipeline stage (e.g., pre-process, post-process).
.It
View existing rules with optional live filtering (press
.Sq f
to filter).
.It
Add, edit, delete, or reorder rules using keyboard shortcuts.
.It
When adding a rule: select a source, field, and match pattern, then
define emit actions (modify plugin output) and write actions (modify
file metadata).
.It
Review and confirm before saving.
.El
.Pp
The editor validates rules as you build them, showing error messages
with recovery suggestions inline.
Changes are saved to the plugin's stage files
.Pq Pa stage-*.json
on confirmation.
.Pp
If a stage has no binary configured, all rules are placed in
.Li preRules
automatically without prompting for a slot choice.
.Ss workflow command [workflow-name] plugin-id
Edit binary command configuration for a plugin's stages within a workflow.
If
.Ar workflow-name
is omitted, a list of available workflows is presented for selection.
Only mutable plugins may be edited with this command.
.Ss clear-cache
Delete plugin execution logs.
.Pp
Available options:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -plugin Ar name
Clear only the specified plugin's execution log.
.El
.Pp
When
.Fl -plugin
is not specified, execution logs for all plugins are deleted.
.Ss secret set plugin key
Store a plugin secret.
Prompts for the value on standard input.
.Pp
On macOS, secrets are stored in the system Keychain.
On Linux, secrets are written to
.Pa ~/.config/piqley/secrets.json .
.Ss secret delete plugin key
Remove a previously stored plugin secret.
.Ss secret prune
Remove orphaned secrets that are not referenced by any installed plugin's
configuration or workflow.
Prints each pruned secret alias and a summary count.
.Ss plugin list
List all installed plugins.
Shows each plugin's identifier, name, version, description, and the
workflows it belongs to.
.Ss plugin setup Op plugin-name
Run interactive setup for one or all plugins.
Each plugin's manifest declares its configuration schema (plain values
and secrets); the setup scanner walks through each entry and prompts for
a value.
.Pp
Available flags:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -force
Force re-setup by clearing existing config values and the
.Li isSetUp
flag before prompting.
.El
.Pp
When
.Ar plugin-name
is omitted, setup runs for all discovered plugins.
.Ss plugin init Op identifier Op display-name
Create a new declarative-only plugin.
Generates a skeleton plugin directory under
.Pa ~/.config/piqley/plugins/
with a
.Pa manifest.json ,
.Pa config.json ,
and example stage files pre-populated with sample rules.
.Pp
The
.Ar identifier
argument is a reverse-TLD string (e.g.,
.Li com.example.myplugin ) .
When omitted in interactive mode, the command prompts for one.
The optional
.Ar display-name
argument sets a human-readable name; if omitted it is derived from
the identifier.
.Pp
Available options:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -description Ar text
Plugin description.
In interactive mode, the command opens
.Ev EDITOR
to compose a description instead.
.It Fl -no-examples
Skip example rules and values in the generated config files.
.It Fl -non-interactive
Non-interactive mode.
Requires the
.Ar identifier
argument.
.El
.Ss plugin create target-directory
Scaffold a new plugin project from an SDK template.
Downloads the appropriate SDK template from the plugin SDK repository,
applies substitutions, and writes the project to
.Ar target-directory .
.Pp
Required options:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -identifier Ar id
Reverse-TLD plugin identifier (e.g.,
.Li com.example.my-plugin ) .
.El
.Pp
Optional:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -language Ar lang
Programming language for the template.
Default:
.Li swift .
.It Fl -name Ar name
Plugin name.
Derived from the target directory name if omitted.
.It Fl -sdk-repo-url Ar url
SDK repository URL.
.El
.Ss plugin install plugin-file
Install a
.Pa .piqleyplugin
package.
Extracts the archive, validates the manifest, flattens platform-specific
directories, and copies the plugin into the plugins directory.
Runs the plugin setup scanner automatically if the manifest declares
configuration entries.
.Pp
Available flags:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -force
Overwrite an existing plugin if already installed.
.El
.Ss plugin update plugin-file
Update an installed plugin from a
.Pa .piqleyplugin
package.
Replaces the existing plugin directory, merges configuration (preserving
values whose keys and types have not changed), and re-runs the setup
scanner for new or changed entries.
Orphaned secrets are pruned automatically after the update.
.Pp
Errors if the plugin is not already installed.
Use
.Cm plugin install
for first-time installation.
.Ss plugin uninstall identifier
Uninstall a plugin by its reverse-TLD identifier.
Removes the plugin directory, strips the plugin from all workflow
pipelines, deletes associated workflow rule directories, removes the
base config file, and prunes orphaned secrets.
.Pp
If other plugins depend on the target plugin, the command errors unless
.Fl -force
is passed.
If the plugin is referenced by one or more workflows, a confirmation
prompt is shown.
.Pp
Available flags:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -force
Force uninstall even if other plugins depend on this one.
.El
.Ss uninstall
Remove all piqley configuration, plugins, and stored secrets.
Deletes the
.Pa ~/.config/piqley/
directory and, on macOS, all Keychain items for the
.Nm
service.
.Pp
Available flags:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -force
Skip the confirmation prompt.
.El
.Sh CONFIGURATION
Workflows are stored as individual JSON files in
.Pa ~/.config/piqley/workflows/ .
The
.Cm setup
command creates the directory and seeds a default workflow.
Use
.Cm workflow edit
to modify workflows interactively or
.Cm workflow open
to edit them directly in your editor.
.Pp
Each workflow file contains the following fields:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It name
.Pq string
Internal identifier for the workflow, matching the filename.
.It displayName
.Pq string
Human-readable name shown in the workflow list.
.It description
.Pq string
Short description of the workflow's purpose.
.It schemaVersion
.Pq integer
Schema version for forward compatibility.
.It pipeline
.Pq object, default: {}
Maps stage names to ordered arrays of plugin identifiers.
Controls which plugins execute for each stage and in what order.
A plugin not listed in any stage simply does not run.
.El
.Ss Plugin configuration
Each plugin has its own
.Pa config.json
inside its plugin directory.
This file contains:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It values
Key-value settings the plugin reads at runtime (e.g., output quality,
tag prefixes).
.It isSetUp
Boolean flag set by
.Cm plugin setup
to indicate the plugin has been configured.
.El
.Pp
Per-workflow overrides can be applied with
.Cm workflow config
to set different values or secret aliases per workflow without modifying
the plugin's base configuration.
.Sh PLUGIN ARCHITECTURE
Plugins live under
.Pa ~/.config/piqley/plugins/<identifier>/ .
Each plugin directory contains:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa manifest.json
Declares the plugin's identifier, name, protocol version, version,
config schema, dependencies, and stage entries.
Each stage entry may specify an executable command with arguments and a
timeout.
.It Pa config.json
Runtime configuration: key-value settings.
Created by
.Cm plugin init
or
.Cm plugin setup .
.It Pa stage-*.json
Per-stage rule files (e.g.,
.Pa stage-pre-process.json ) .
Each contains pre-rules, an optional binary configuration, and
post-rules.
Edit interactively with
.Cm workflow rules
or by hand.
.It Pa logs/execution.jsonl
Append-only execution log written by the pipeline orchestrator.
Cleared by
.Cm clear-cache .
.It Pa data/
Plugin-managed persistent data directory.
.El
.Ss Stages
Plugins subscribe to named stages declared in their manifest.
Stages run in the order defined by the pipeline configuration.
A stage entry without a command is declarative-only and relies on the
rules in the plugin's stage files.
.Ss Secrets
Plugin secrets are managed with
.Cm secret set ,
.Cm secret delete ,
and
.Cm secret prune .
On macOS, secrets are stored in the Keychain under the
.Nm
service name.
On Linux, they are stored in
.Pa ~/.config/piqley/secrets.json .
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev EDITOR
Editor used by
.Cm workflow open
and
.Cm plugin init
to open files.
Falls back to
.Xr open 1
on macOS when unset.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa ~/.config/piqley/workflows/
Directory containing named workflow files (JSON).
Each file defines a pipeline and is created by the
.Cm setup
or
.Cm workflow create
command.
.It Pa ~/.config/piqley/plugins/
Plugin directory.
Each subdirectory is a plugin containing
.Pa manifest.json
and optionally
.Pa config.json .
.It Pa ~/.config/piqley/secrets.json
Secret store for Linux.
On macOS, secrets are stored in the Keychain instead.
.It Pa ~/.config/piqley/piqley.lock
Advisory lock file to prevent concurrent execution.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It 0
All images processed successfully (or command completed without error).
.It 1
Fatal error.
Causes include: missing or invalid configuration, plugin failures, and
another instance of
.Nm
already running.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Process a folder of exported images:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
piqley process ~/Photos/export
.Ed
.Pp
Preview what would happen without uploading:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
piqley process ~/Photos/export --dry-run
.Ed
.Pp
Process with debug output:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
piqley process ~/Photos/export --debug
.Ed
.Pp
List all workflows:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
piqley workflow list
.Ed
.Pp
Edit a workflow interactively:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
piqley workflow edit
.Ed
.Pp
Open a workflow file in your editor:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
piqley workflow open default
.Ed
.Pp
Set per-workflow config overrides for a plugin:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
piqley workflow config default com.example.tagger --set tagPrefix=auto
.Ed
.Pp
Edit rules for a plugin interactively:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
piqley workflow rules com.example.tagger
.Ed
.Pp
List all installed plugins:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
piqley plugin list
.Ed
.Pp
Create a new declarative plugin:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
piqley plugin init com.example.tagger "My Tagger"
.Ed
.Pp
Scaffold a plugin project from an SDK template:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
piqley plugin create ~/Projects/my-plugin --identifier com.example.myplugin
.Ed
.Pp
Install a plugin package:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
piqley plugin install ~/Downloads/com.example.uploader.piqleyplugin
.Ed
.Pp
Update an installed plugin:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
piqley plugin update ~/Downloads/com.example.uploader.piqleyplugin
.Ed
.Pp
Uninstall a plugin:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
piqley plugin uninstall com.example.uploader
.Ed
.Pp
Store a secret for a plugin:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
piqley secret set com.example.uploader api-key
.Ed
.Pp
Remove orphaned secrets:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
piqley secret prune
.Ed
.Pp
Run setup for a specific plugin:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
piqley plugin setup com.example.uploader
.Ed
.Pp
Clear execution logs for a specific plugin:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
piqley clear-cache --plugin com.example.uploader
.Ed
.Pp
Remove all piqley data without confirmation:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
piqley uninstall --force
.Ed
